Namô Tassa Bhagavatô ArahatôSammâ-Sambuddhassa

Homage to the liberated, the all conquering,
the fully self-enlightened.


Majjhima Nikāya 119 

How, wise ones, is mindfulness of the body developed and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?


(MINDFULNESS OF BREATHING) // Anapanasati

Here, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, one sits down; having folded his legs crosswise, set the body erect, and established mindfulness in front of oneself, ever mindful one breathes in, mindful one breathes out.

Breathing in long, one understands: ‘I breathe in long’; or breathing out long, one understands: ‘I breathe out long.’
Breathing in short, one understands: ‘I breathe in short; or breathing out short, one understands: ‘I breathe out short.’
One trains thus:
	‘I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body’;
	‘I shall breathe out experiencing the whole body.’
	‘I shall breathe in tranquilizing the bodily sankhāra’;
	‘I shall breathe out tranquilizing the bodily sankhāra.’

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned; with their abandoning the mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.

That is how a wise one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

(THE FOUR POSTURES)

When walking, one understands: ‘I am walking’; when standing, one understands: ‘I am standing’;
when sitting, he understands: ‘I am sitting’; when lying down, he understands: ‘I am lying down’;
or he understands accordingly however his body is disposed.

As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned...That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.



(FULL AWARENESS)

Again, wise one is one who acts in full awareness when going forward and returning;
who acts in full awareness when looking ahead and looking away;
who acts in full awareness when flexing and extending limbs;
who acts in full awareness when wearing robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl;
who acts in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting;
who acts in full awareness when defecating or urinating;
who acts in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned...
That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

(FOULNESS ― THE BODILY PARTS)

A wise one reviews this same body up from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair, bounded by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus:
‘In this body there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine.’

Just as though there were a bag with an opening at both ends full of many sorts of grain, such as hill rice, red rice, beans, peas, millet, and white rice, and a man with good eyes were to open it and review it thus: ‘This is hill rice, this is red rice, these are beans, these are peas, this is millet, this is white rice’; so too, a wise one reviews this same body as full of many kinds of impurity thus: ‘In this body there are head-hairs...and urine.’

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned...
That too is how a one develops mindfulness of the body.


(ELEMENTS)

Again, a wise one reviews this same body, however it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of elements thus:
‘In this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.’

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, one's memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned...
That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.


(THE NINE CHARNEL GROUND CONTEMPLATIONS)

Again, as though one were to see a corpse thrown aside in a charnel ground :
	one, two, or three days dead, bloated, livid, and oozing matter,
	being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms,
	a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with sinews...
	a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together with sinews...
	a skeleton without flesh and blood, held together with sinews...
	disconnected bones scattered in all directions…
	bones bleached white, the color of shells...
	bones heaped up, more than a year old...
	bones rotted and crumbled to dust,
a wise one compares this same body with it thus:

‘This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.’

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, one's memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned...
That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

(THE JHĀNAS)

First Jhāna
Again, wise ones, quite secluded from sensual blisss, secluded from unwholesome states, one enters upon and abides in the first jhāna of meditative absorption, which is
	accompanied by applied and sustained thought,
	with rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

One makes the rapture and bliss born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of this whole body unpervaded by the rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man’s apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball itself does not ooze; so too, one makes the rapture and bliss born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and bliss born of seclusion.

As one abides thus diligent...That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.


---

Second Jhāna
Again, wise ones, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, one enters upon and abides in the second jhāna, which has
	self-confidence and singleness of mind
	without applied and sustained thought,
	with rapture and bliss born of concentration.

One makes the rapture and bliss born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and bliss born of concentration.

Just as though there were a lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west, north, or south, and would not be replenished from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, one makes the rapture and bliss born of concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and bliss born of concentration.

As one abides thus diligent...That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

Third Jhāna

Again, wise ones, with the fading away as well of rapture, one abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling bliss with the body, one enters upon and abides in the third jhāna, on account of which noble ones announce:
	‘One has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.’

One makes the bliss free of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of this whole body unpervaded by the bliss free of rapture.

Just as in a pond of blue or white or red lotuses, some lotuses that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, one makes the bliss divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of this whole body unpervaded by the bliss divested of rapture.

As one abides thus diligent... That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

Fourth Jhāna

Again, wise ones, with the abandoning of bliss and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, one enters upon and abides in the fourth jhāna, which has neither-pain-nor-bliss and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

One sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of this whole body unpervaded by a pure bright mind.

Just as though a person were sitting covered from head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of their whole body not covered by the white cloth; so too, one sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is no part of this body unpervaded by a pure bright mind.

As one abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, one's memories and intentions based on the worldly life are abandoned; with their abandoning one's mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.

That too is how one develops mindfulness of the body.

---

(PROGRESS THROUGH MINDFULNESS OF THE BODY)

Wise ones, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body has included within himself whatever wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge. Just as anyone who has extended his mind over the great ocean has included within it whatever streams there are that flow into the ocean; so too, anyone who has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body has included within himself whatever wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge.

When anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find an opportunity or a support in them.

Suppose there were a wet sappy piece of wood, and a man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: ‘I shall light a fire, I shall produce heat.’ What do you think, bhikkhus? Could the man light a fire and produce heat by taking the upper fire-stick and rubbing it against the wet sappy piece of wood?” ― “No, venerable sir.” ― “So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find an opportunity or a support in him.

Suppose, set out on a stand, there were a water jug full of water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it, and a man came with a supply of water. What do you think, bhikkhus? Could the man pour the water into the jug?” ― “No, venerable sir.” ― “So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Māra cannot find an opportunity or a support in him.

When anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, then when one inclines one's mind towards realizing any state that may be realized by direct knowledge, one attains the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.

Suppose there were a chariot on even ground at the crossroads, harnessed to thoroughbreds, waiting with goad lying ready, so that a skilled trainer, a charioteer of horses to be tamed, might mount it, and taking the reins might drive out and back by any road whenever he likes. So too, when anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body... one attains the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.



(BENEFITS OF MINDFULNESS OF THE BODY)

When mindfulness of the body has been repeatedly practiced, developed, cultivated, used as a vehicle, used as a basis, established, consolidated, and well undertaken, these ten benefits may be expected. What ten?

	(i) One becomes a conqueror of discontent and delight, and discontent does not conquer oneself; one abides overcoming discontent whenever it arises.

---

	(ii) One becomes a conqueror of fear and dread, and fear and dread do not conquer oneself; one abides overcoming fear and dread whenever they arise.

	(iii) One bears cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping things; one endures ill-spoken, unwelcome words and arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, disagreeable, distressing, and menacing to life.

	(iv) One obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhānas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now.

	(v) One wields the various kinds of supernormal power...(as Sutta 108, §18)...one wields bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world.

	(vi) With the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the human, one hears both kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as well as near.

	(vii) One understands the minds of other beings, of other persons, having encompassed them with one’s own mind. One understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust...(as Sutta 108, §20)...an unliberated mind as unliberated.

	(viii) One recollects one’s manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births...(as Sutta 51, §24)...Thus with their aspects and particulars one recollects one’s manifold past lives.

	(ix) With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, one sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and one understands how beings pass on according to their actions.

	(x) By realizing for oneself with direct knowledge, one here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.

	Wise onse, when mindfulness of the body has been repeatedly practiced, developed, cultivated, used as a vehicle, used as a basis, established, consolidated, and well undertaken, these ten benefits may be expected.



