Mettā
Loving Kindness

Mettā-bhāvanā, translated as the "cultivation" or "development of loving-kindness.


1. To Oneself
2. To a respected person / dear friend
3. To a neutral person
4. To a hostile enemy
5. All together › All beings

1. In this building
2. In this compound / property
3. In this neighbourhood
4. On the earth
5. In all worlds, visible or invisible

1. Free of Attachment / Aversion
2. Free of Physical / Mental suffering


1. I forgive all beings who have harmed me
2. May all beings who I have harmed, please forgive me
3. I forgive myself for causing myself harm
4. I forgive myself for causing others harm

1. May all beings travelling on the path to liberation arrive safely
2. May all beings be healthy and happy

-----------

Visualizations 

- Filled with Golden Light

-----------

REFERENCES :

Khp 9: Karaṇīyamettā Sutta — Good Will/Loving-kindness
	The Buddha's words on cultivating a heart filled with good will (metta) towards all beings.

MN 21: Kakacupama Sutta — The Simile of the Saw
	How to cultivate a heart of metta (loving-kindness), no matter how others may try to provoke you.

MN 99: Subha Sutta — To Subha (excerpt)
	The Buddha instructs a brahman youth on how to reach the company of Brahma through the practice of developing metta (loving-kindness).


Brahmavihāras  // Brahma-vihara // Abodes of Brahma // The Divine Abodes / Sublime States / four immeasurables // Sanskrit: apramāṇa, Pāli: appamaññā

Love or Loving-kindness (metta)
Compassion (karuna)
Sympathetic Joy (mudita)
Equanimity (upekkha)

Pāli: cattāri brahmavihārā
Sanskrit: 'चत्वारि ब्रह्मविहारा (IAST: catvāri brahmavihārāḥ)
Brahmavihāra means “Brahma abidings”, or "sublime attitudes."[7] It may be parsed as "Brahma" and "vihāra"; which is often rendered into English as "sublime" or "divine abodes".



-----------

http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/snp/snp.1.08.amar.html
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/kn/snp/snp.1.08.than.html
http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/buddharakkhita/wheel365.html
http://www.samadhi-buddhist.com/Karaniya%20Metta%20Sutta.pdf
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metta_Sutta

---------------------------------
///////// SUTRAS /////////
---------------------------------

1. ---------------------------------

DN:8:16 Mahāsīhanāda Sutta - The Great Lion’s Roar
When a wise one develops non-enmity, non-ill-will and a heart full of loving-kindness and, abandoning the corruptions, realizes and dwells in the uncorrupted deliverance of mind, the deliverance through wisdom, having realized it in this very life by one's own insight, then, that wise one becomes vast and profound.


2. ----------------

SN 1:8  Suttanipāta /  Karaṇīyamettā Sutta  
The Discourse On Loving Kindness

One skilled in wisdom
Who wishes to attain -peace- should act thus :
	Able, virtuous, upright,
	Diligent, gentle and humble,
	Contented, easily satisfied,
	With few duties, simple in livelihood
	Controlled in senses, discreet, modest,
	Not proud or demanding in nature.

One should not do even the slightest thing
	Which the wise would not approve.

Developing and cultivating a mind of loving kindness :
	May all beings be safe, may all beings be happy.

Whatsoever living beings that exist,	without exception,
Weak and strong, large, medium and small,
Dwelling far and near, subtle and gross,
Visible and invisible, born and unborn
May all beings be happy.

Let none deceive another
or despise any being in any state.
or despise anyone anywhere,
or through anger or ill-will
wish for another to suffer.

Just as a mother would guard her only child
At the risk of her own life
One emanates loving kindness towards all beings,
Cultivating measureless liberation of the mind.

Thus above, and so below, across and everywhere,
to all as oneself, one dwells pervading the entire world
with a mind imbued with long kindness, vast, exalted,
measureless, without hostility, without ill will.

When standing, when walking, when sitting, when lying down, 
One abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute,
Cultivating measureless liberation of the mind.

This is the Brahma-metta-vihāra -
	the supreme divine abiding.

Not fallen into delusion
	Virtuous and endowed with clear insight
	Liberated from all pleasure of the senses
	One is beyond rebirth.

By firm determination of this virtue
	may I be protected, free of illness, and victorious!




3. ---------------------------------

SN:41:7 //Cittasamyutta
*Measureless liberation of the mind*

SN:41:7: A wise one dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, and so below, across and everywhere, to all as oneself, one dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with long kindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will. One dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with compassion, altruistic joy, and equanimity. Thus above, and so below, across and everywhere, to all as oneself, one dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will. This is called measureless liberation of the mind.

SN:42:8: Just as a strong conch blower can easily send one's signal to four quarters, so too when the liberation of the mind by equanimity is developed and cultivated in this way, any limited karma that was done does not remain or persist there.


4. ---------------------------------


SN 20:5 / Samyutta Nikāya // Opammasamyutta : The Spear

"Suppose there was a sharp sword, and a man would come along thinking: 'I will bend back this sharp sword with my hand or fist, twist it out of shape, and twirl it around…' That man would only experience fatigue and vexation.

"So to, wise ones, when one has developed and cultivated the liberation of mind by loving-kindness, made it a vehicle, made it a basis, stabilized it, exercised oneself in it, and fully perfected it - if a being thinks they can overthrow one's mind, that being would only experience fatigue and vexation. 

Therefore, it is wise to train yourself thus in the development, cultivation… and perfection of loving-kindness.



5. ---------------------------------

MN:21:11 Kakacūpama Sutta - The Simile of the Saw

There are five courses of speech that others may use when they address you.
When others address you, their speech may be :
1. timely or untimely, 2. true or untrue, 3. gentle or harsh, 4. connected with good or with harm, 5. spoken with a mind of inner kindness or inner hate.

Wise ones, you should train thus:
'My minds will remain unaffected, and I shall utter no evil words;
I shall abide compassionate for others welfare,
with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.

I shall abide pervading others with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
and starting with them, I shall abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.'

Even if bandits were to sever you savagely limb by limb with a two handled saw, one who gives rise to hatred and ill-will towards them would not have mastered this teaching.

Therefore, it is wise to train yourself thus in the development, cultivation… and perfection of loving-kindness. That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.


---------------------------------


SN:20:5 // Opammasamyutta
*Fully Perfected*

When a wise one has developed and cultivated liberation of the mind by loving kindness, made it a vehicle, made it a basis, stabilized it, exercised oneself in it, and fully perfected it, if a being thinks they can overthrow one's mind, that being would only experience fatigue and vexation.


---------------------------------

MN 104 Sāmagāma Sutta - At Sāmagāma

21. “Ānanda, there are these six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity. What are the six?

1. Here, a wise one maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life. This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.

2. Again, one maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life. This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.

3. Again, one maintains mental acts of loving-kindness both in public and in private towards his companions in the holy life. This is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.

4. Again, one enjoys things in common with his virtuous companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the Dharma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the Dharma, including even what is in his bowl. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.

5. Again, one dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with this companions in the holy life those virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, liberating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and conducive to concentration. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to…unity.

6. Again, one dwells both in public and in private possessing in common with his companions in the holy life that view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who practices in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffering. This too is a principle of cordiality that creates love and respect, and conduces to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.

These are the six principles of cordiality that create love and respect, and conduce to cohesion, to non-dispute, to concord, and to unity.



----------------
MN 128 Upakkilesa Sutta - Imperfections

Buddha : Anuruddha, how do you live thus?

Anuruddha : I think thus: 'It is a gain for me, it is a great gain for me that I am living with such companions in the holy life.'

I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards these venerable ones both openly and privately;
I maintain verbal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately;
I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately.

I consider: ‘Why should I not set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do?’

Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish to do. We are different in body, venerable sir, but one in mind.

That is how, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.

Buddha : Good, Anuruddha - May you all abide diligent, ardent, and resolute.


----------------

AN:4:67 - Angutarra Nikāya / The Book of Fours / Snakes

A number of monks approached Śākyamuni, paid homage to him, sat down on one side, and said : "Bhante, a certain monk here in Sāvatthī was bitten by a snake and died."

Śākyamuni said : "Surely, wise ones, that one red not pervade the four royal families of Nāgas (Nāgarājakulāni) with a mind of loving-kindness. For if he had done so, he would not have been bitten by a snake a died. I enjoin you, wise ones, to pervade the four royal families of Nāgas with a mind of loving-kindness, for your own security, safety and protection."

"I have loving-kindness for the Virūpakkhas Nāgas;		for the Erāpatha Nāgas I have loving-kindness.	I have loving-kindness for the Chabbyāputta Nāgas;		for the Black Kanha-gotamakas Nāgas I have loving-kindness.


Virūpa = Ugly, deformed, unsightly  // diversity, variety


Erāpatha =
āpatha　《PTS Pali-English dictionary》 The Pali Text Society's Pali-English dictionary
,in micchāpatha, dvedhāpatha as classified in Vbh.Ind. p. 441 should be grouped under patha as micchā°, dvedhā°. (Page 102)
micchā  = Vedic mithaḥ interchanging, separate, opposite, contrary 



"I have loving-kindness for footless creatures;
for those with two feet I  have loving-kindness.
I have loving-kindness for those with four feet;
for those with many feet I have loving-kindness.

"May footless beings not hard me;
may no harm come to me from hose with two feet;
may four-footed being not harm me;
may no harm come to me from those with many feet.

"May all beings, all living things,
all creatures, every one,
meet with good fortune;
may nothing bad come to anyone.

The Buddha is measureless, the Dharma is measureless, the Sagha is measureless; creeping things, snakes, scorpions, centipedes, spiders, lizards, and rates are finite. I have made a safeguard, I have made protection. Let the creatures retreat. I pay homage to the Blessed One, homage to the seven Perfectly Enlightened ones.



----------------

AN:8:1 - Angutarra Nikāya - The Book of Eights

Wise ones, when liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made as a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, eight benefits are to be expected. What eight?

1. One sleeps well,
2. One awakens happily,
3. One does not have bad dreams,
4. One is pleasing to human beings,
5. One is pleasing to spirits,
6. Deities protect one,
7. Fire, poison and weapons do not injure one and,
8. If one does not penetrate further, one moves on to the brahmā world

When, wise ones, liberation of the mind by loving-kindness has been pursued, developed, and cultivated, made as a vehicle and basis, carried out, consolidated, and properly undertaken, these eight benefits are to be expected.

For one who, ever mindful, developes
measureless loving-kindness,
the fetters thin out as one sees
the destruction of the acquisitions.

	Four Kinds of Acquisitions (Upadhi) :
		The Five Aggregates (khandha • skandha)
		Defilements (kilesa • kleśā)
		Volitional formations (saṅkhāra • saṃskāra)
		Sensual pleasures (kāmacchanda)

If, with a mind free from hate,
one arouses love toward just one being,
one thereby becomes good.
Compassionate in mind towards all beings,
the noble one generates abundant merit.

Those royal sages who conquered the earth
with it's multitudes of beings
traveled around performing sacrifices:
the horse sacrifice, the person sacrifice,
sammāpāsa : the binding of human hearts, 
vājapayya : the spell of words by kind and convincing speech, and
niraggala : the wide open giving of alms.

All these are not worth a sixteenth part
of a well developed loving mind,
just as a host of stars cannot match
a sixteenth part of the moon's radiance.

One who does not kill of enjoin killing,
who does not conquer or enjoin conquest,
one who has loving-kindness towards all beings
harbours no enmity towards anyone.

----------------

AN:4:62 - Angutarra Nikāya / The Book of Sevens / Do not Fear Merit

Wise ones, do not be afraid of merit. This is a designation for happiness, that is, merit.

I recall that for a long time I experienced the desirable, lovely, agreeable result of merit that had been made over a long time. For seven years I developed a mind of loving-kindness. As a consequence, for seven eons of world-dissolution and evolution I did not come back to this world.

When the world was dissolving, I fared onto the realm of streaming radiance. When the world was evolving, I was reborn in an empty mansion of Brahmā. There I was Brahmā, the Great Brahmā, the vanquisher, the unvanquished, the universal seer, the wielder of mastery. I was Sakka, ruler of the devas, thirty-six times. Many hundreds of times I was a wheel-turning monarch, a righteous king who ruled by Dharma, a conquerer whose rule extended to the four boundaries, one who had attained stability in his country, who possessed the seven gems. I had over a thousand sons who were heroes, vigerous, able to crush the armies of their enemies. I reigned after conquering this earth as far as it's ocean boundaries, not by force and weapons but by Dharma.





