
MN 91 Brahmāyu Sutta - Brahmāyu
----------


-------

SN 22:43 // Samyutta Nikāya / With yourself as an Island

Wise ones, dwell with yourselves as an island, with yourselves as a refuge, with no other refuge; with Dharma as an island, with the Dharma as a refuge, with no other refuge. When you dwell in this way, the basis itself should be investigated thus: 'From what are sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair born? How are they produced?'

The uninstructed worldling, who is unskilled and undisciplined in Dharma, regards form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form. That form of one's changes and alters. With the change and alteration of form, there arise in one sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.

One regards feeling… perception… volition… consciousness as self, or self as possessing consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness. That consciousness of one's changes and alters. With the change and alteration of consciousness, there arise in one sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.

But, wise ones, when one has understood
the impermanence of form…
the impermanence of feeling…
the impermanence of perception…
the impermanence of volition…
the impermanence of consciousness…
…it's change, it's fading away, and cessation, and when one sees as it really is with perfect wisdom thus: 'In the past and also now all these aggregates are impermanent, suffering, and subject to change,' then sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair are abandoned. With their abandonment, one does not become agitated. Being un-agitated, one dwells happily. A wise one who dwells happily is said to be quenched.

SN 22:46

When one sees this thus as it really is with perfect wisdom, one holds no more views concerning the past. When one holds no more views concerning the past, one holds no more views concerning the future. When one holds no more views concerning the future, one has no more stubborn grasping. When one has no more stubborn grasping, the mind becomes dispassionate towards form, feeling, perception, volitional formations, and consciousness and is liberated from impurities by non-clinging.

SN 22:47

The sense faculties remain right there, but in regard to them the instructed noble disciple abandons ignorance and arouses true knowledge. With the fading away of ignorance, and the arising of true knowledge, 'I am' does not occur to one; 'I am this' does not occur to one; 'I will be' and 'I will not be' and 'I will consist of form' and 'I will be formless'… these do not occur to one.


-------

SN 22:59 // Samyutta Nikāya / The Characteristic of Non-self (Anattā)

Wise ones, form is nonself. For if form were self, this form would not lead to affliction, and it would be possible to command it: 'Let my form be thus; let my form be not thus.' But because form is non self, form leads to affliction, and it is not possible to command form in this way.

Feeling is nonself… Perception is nonself… Volitions are nonself… Consciousness is nonself. For if consciousness were self, this consciousness would not lead to affliction, and it would be possible to command it: 'Let my consciousness be thus; let my consciousness be not thus.' But because consciousness is nonself, consciousness leads to affliction, and it is not possible to command consciousness in this way.

-

Wise ones, what do you think? Are form… feeling… perception… volitions… consciousness… permanent or impermanent?

Impermanent, bhagavan.

Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness? 

Suffering, bhagavan.

Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be reguarded: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self?'

No, bhagavan.

Therefore, wise ones, any kind of form… feeling… perception… volition… consciousness… whatsoever, whether past, future or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, interior of superior, far or near, all aggregates should be seen as it really is with perfect wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'

- 

Seeing thus, wise ones, the instructed noble disciple becomes wearied of form, wearied of feeling, wearied of perception, wearied of volition, wearied of consciousness. Experiencing weariness, one becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, one's mind is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge that one has gone beyond. One understands 'Destroyed is rebirth, the sacred life has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more for this [suffering] state of being.'

-------

SN 22:29 // Samyutta Nikāya / Delight

Wise ones, one who seeks delight in form seeks delight in suffering. One who seeks delight in suffering is not freed from suffering.  One who seeks delight in feeling… in perception… in volition… in consciousness seeks delight in suffering. One who seeks delight in suffering is not freed from suffering.

One who does not seek delight in form… in feeling… in perception… in volition… in consciousness does not seek delight in suffering. One who does not seek delight in suffering is freed from suffering.

-------

SN 22:30 // Samyutta Nikāya / Root of Misery

Wise ones, I will teach you misery, and the root of misery. Listen to this…
What is misery? [The Five Aggregates] Form is misery; feeling is misery; perception is misery; volitions are misery; consciousness is misery. This is called misery.

And what, wise ones, is the root of misery? It is this craving that leads to renewed existence, accompanied by delight and desire, seeking delight here and there; that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for existence, craving for extermination. This is called the root of misery.


----------------------------------------------


AN:4:186 / Acumen

A wise person of great wisdom does not intend for one's own affliction, or for the affliction of others, or for the affliction of both. Rather, when one thinks, one thinks only of one's own welfare, the welfare of others, the welfare of both, and the welfare of the whole world. It is in this way that one is a wise person of great wisdom.

AN:7:67:7

Just as the wall in the kingdom's frontier fortress is high and wide, covered by a coat of plaster, for protecting it's inhabitants and for warding off outsiders, so too a noble seer is wise; one possesses the wisdom that discerns the impermanence of arising and passing away, which is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering. With wisdom as one's coat of plaster, the noble seer abandons the unwholesome and develops the wholesome, abandons the blameworthy and developed what is blameless, and maintains oneself in purity.


AN:1:76

Insignificant is the loss of relatives, wealth or fame. The worst thing to lose is wisdom.

Insignificant is the increase of relatives, wealth, or fame. The best thing in which to increase is wisdom. 

Therefore, wise ones, you should train yourself thus: 'We will increase in wisdom.' It is in such a way that you should train yourselves.


AN:4:151

There are these four lights. What four? The light of the moon, the light of the sun, the light of fire, and the light of wisdom. These are the four lights. Of these four lights, the light of wisdom is foremost.

AN:5:16

There are these five powers. What five? The power of faith, the power of energy, the power of mindfulness, the power of concentration and the power of wisdom. These are the five powers. Among these five powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one what holds all in place, the one that unifies them. Just as the peak is the chief part of a peaked-roof house, the part that holds all in place, that unifies them, so among these five powers, the power of wisdom is foremost, the one that holds all in place, the one that unifies them.

AN:5:46

There are these five accomplishments. What five? Accomplishment in devotion, accomplishment in virtuous conduct, accomplishment in learning, accomplishment in generosity, accomplishment in wisdom.

AN:1:591

One thing, when developed and cultivated, leads to differentiation by wisdom, leads to nirvana through non-clinging. What is that one things? Mindfulness of body. This is the one thing that, when developed and cultivated, leads to differentiation by wisdom, leads to nirvana through non-clinging.


AN:9:5: Powers

What is the power of wisdom? One has clearly seen and explored with wisdom those qualities that are unwholesome and reckoned as unwholesome; those that are wholesome and reckoned and wholesome those that are blameless and reckoned as blameless; those that are blameable and reckoned as blameable; those that are dark and reckoned as dark; those that are bright and reckoned as bright … this is called the power of wisdom.


AN:4:248

These four things lead to the growth of wisdom. What four? Association with good people, hearing the good Dharma, careful attention, and practice in accordance with the Dharma. These four things lead to the growth of wisdom.



----------------

Buddha Quotes // Khandasaṃyutta, Saṃyutta Nikāya, Pali Canon

(5) Concentration, (6) Seclusion
(5) Wise ones, develop concentration. One who is concentrated understands things as they really are. (6) Wise
ones, make an exertion in seclusion. One who makes an exertion in seclusion understands things as they really are. What what does one understand as it really is? The origin and passing away of [the 5 aggregates: ] 1. form, 2. contact/consciousness, 3. perception, 4. feeling/sensations and 5. sankhara/volitional formations. And what, wise ones, is the origin of the 5 aggregates? One seeks delight in form, contact/consciousness with form, perception of form, feelings/sensations resulting from form, and sankharas/volitional formations reacting to form. One welcomes it, and remains holding to it. As a consequence of this, delight arises. Delight in form is clinging. With one’s clinging as condition, existence comes to be; with existence as condition, birth; with birth as condition, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair come to be. Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering. This is the origin of the 5 aggregates : 1. form, 2. contact/consciousness, 3. perception, 4. feeling/sensations, and 5. sankhara/volitional formations. What what is the passing away of the 5 aggregates? One does not seek delight in form, does not welcome it, does not remain holding to it. As a consequence of this, delight in form ceases. With the cessation of delight comes cessation of clinging, with cessation of clinging, cessation of existence… Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.

(7) Agitation through Clinging
How, wise ones, is there agitation through clinging? Here, the uninstructed worldling, who is not a seer of the noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dharma, regards form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form. That form of one’s changes or alters. With the change and alteration of form, one’s consciousness becomes preoccupied with the change of form. Agitation and a constellation of mental states born of preoccupation with the change in form remain obsessing one’s mind. Because one’s mind is obsessed, one becomes frightened, distressed and anxious, and through clinging one becomes agitated. One regards [ the 5 aggregates: ] 1. form, 2. contact/consciousness, 3. perception, 4. feeling/sensations, and 5. sankhara/volitional formations, as self or self as possessing them, or them as in self or self as in them… Through clinging to the aggregates one becomes agitated. In such a way, there is agitation through clinging. And how, wise ones, is there non-agitation through non-clinging? Here, the instructed noble disciple, who is a seer of the noble ones, and is skilled and disciplined in their Dharma, does not regard form as self, or self as possessing form, or form as in self, or self as in form. That form changes and alters. Despite the change and alteration of form, one’s consciousness does not become preoccupied with the change in form. No agitation and constellation of mental states is born out of preoccupation with the change in form that remains obsessing one’s mind. Because one’s mind is not obsessed, one is not frightened, distressed of anxious, and through non-clinging one does not become agitated. Such a wise one does not regard the 5 aggregates as self, or self as possessing them, of them as in self or self as in them… and through non-clinging one
does not become agitated. It is in this way that there is non-agitation through non-clinging.

-------------------

( The Buddha // Vedanāsamyutta, Samyutta Nikāya, Pali Canon )

One who cannot endure
the arisen painful feelings [sensations],
Bodily feelings that sap one’s life,
Who trembled when they touch him,
A weakling of little strength
Who weeps out loud and wails:
This one has not risen up in the bottomless abyss,
Nor has this one even gained a foothold.

But one who is able to endure them –
The arisen painful feelings,
Bodily feelings that sap one’s life –
Who trembles not when they touch:
This one has risen up in the bottomless abyss,
And this one has also gained a foothold.

One who has seen the pleasant as painful
And the painful as a dart,
Seen as impermanent the peaceful feeling
Neither painful nor pleasant:
This is a wise one who sees rightly,
One who fully understands feelings.

Having fully understood feelings,
One is taintless in this very life.
Standing in the Dharma, with the body’s breakup
The knowledge master cannot be reckoned.

The wise one, learned, does not feel
The pleasant and painful mental feelings
[Only the pleasant and painful bodily feelings]
This is the great different between
The wise one and the worldling.

For the learned one who has comprehended Dharma,
Who clearly sees this world and the next,
Desirable things do not provoke one’s mind,
Towards the undesired one has no aversion.

For this one, attraction and repulsion no more exist;
Both have been extinguished, brought to an end.
Having known the dust-free, sorrowless state,
The transcender of existence rightly understands.

-----------------------------



( Sagāthāvagga / Devaputtasamyutta, Pali Canon )

At Sāvatthi, when the night had advanced, the young Deva Māgha, of stunning beauty, illuminating the entire Jeta’s Grove, approached the Buddha. Having approached, he paid homage to the Buddha, stood to one side, and addressed the Buddha in verse :

Deva Māgha :
Having slain what does one sleep soundly?
Having slain what does one not sorrow?
What is the one thing, O Buddha,
Whose killing you approve?

Buddha :
Having slain anger, one sleeps soundly;
Having slain anger, one does not sorrow;
The killing of anger, O Deva,
With it’s poisoned root and honeyed tip:
This is the killing the noble ones praise,
For having slain that, one does not sorrow.



----------------------------


( The Buddha // Rādasamyutta )
Suppose some little boys or girls are playing with sand castles. So long as they are not devoid of lust, desire, thirst and craving for those sand castles, they cherish them, play with them, treasure them, and treat them possessively. But when those little boys or girls lose their lust, desire, thirst and craving for those sand castles then they scatter them with their hands and feet, demolish them, shatter them, and put them out of play.
So too, wise ones, scatter all illusion, demolish it, shatter it, put it out of play; practice for the destruction of craving. For with the destruction of all craving is Enlightenment.

----------------------------

( The Buddha // 7. Godatta, Cittasamyutta, Salayatanavagga )

A wise one dwells pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving kindness, likewise the second quarter, the third quarter, and the fourth quarter. Thus above, and so below, across and everywhere, to all as oneself, one dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with long kindness, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will. One dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with compassion, altruistic joy, and equanimity. Thus above, and so below, across and everywhere, to all as oneself, one dwells pervading the entire world with a mind imbued with equanimity, vast, exalted, measureless, without hostility, without ill will. This is called measureless liberation of the mind.


----------------------------

(The Buddha //  9. Sundarika, Brāhmanasamyutta, Sagāthāvagga, Samyutta Nikāya, Pali Canon)

When kindling wood, do not imagine
This external deed brings purity;
The masters say no purity is gained
By one who seeks it outwardly.

Having given up the fire made from wood,
I kindle the inner light alone.
Always ablaze, my mind is always concentrated,
Fully liberated in the eternal life.

----------------------------

MN:19:27
Meditate, O wise ones, do not delay or else you will regret it later. This is all the enlightened ones’ instruction to you.

------------------


Gone Beyond // SN:35
O wise ones, there are forms cognizable by the senses that are desirable, lovely, agreeable, pleasing, sensually enticing, tantalizing. This is called “the ocean” in the Noble One’s Discipline. Here this world with its devas, Māra, and Brahmā, this generation with it’s spiritual wanderers, devas and humans, for the most part is submerged, become like tangled hair, like a knotted ball of thread, like matted reeds and rushes, and cannot pass beyond the plane of misery, the bad destinations, the nether world, samsāra. One who has expunged greed and hate, and all ignorance has crossed this ocean so hard to cross, with it’s dangers of sharks, demons, waves. The knowledge-master who has lived the holy life, reached the world’s end, is called one “gone beyond.”

The tie-surmounter, death-forsaker, without acquisitions, this one has abandoned suffering for no renewed existence. Passed away, and immeasurable, I say: This one has bewildered the King of Death.


-----------

( Deva Kassapa // Devaputtasamyutta, Pali Canon )
If one desires enlightenment, Bent on that as his advantage, One should be a meditator, One who is liberated
in mind. Having known the world’s rise and fall, Let one be lofty in mind and unattached.


-------------

( The Buddha // Bhaddekaratta Sutta )

Let not a person revive the past
Or build hopes on the future;
For the past is left behind
And the future has not been reached.
Instead with insight let one see
Each presently arisen state;
Let one know that and be sure of it,
Invincibly, unshakeably.
Today the effort must be made:
Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?
No bargain with Mortality
Can keep death and it’s hordes away,
But one who dwells in wisdom,
Relentlessly, by day, by night —
It is this one, the Peaceful Sage has said
Who has had a single excellent night.

-----------

( The Buddha // Ananavibhanga Sutta)
One should know how to define pleasure, and knowing that, one should pursue pleasure within oneself. Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a wise one enters upon and abides in the jhanas of meditative absorption. This is called the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment. I say, this is the kind of pleasure that should be pursued, developed, cultivated and should not be feared. It is with reference to this that it was said : ‘One should know how to define pleasure, and knowing that, one should pursue pleasure within oneself.’


-------


“Herein, what are the six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation? When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, equanimity arises. Such equanimity as this transcends the form; that is why it is called equanimity based on renunciation.
“When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away, and cessation of sounds…of odors…of flavors…of tangibles…of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom that mind-objects both formerly and now are all impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, equanimity arises. Such equanimity as this transcends the mind-object; that is why it is called equanimity based on renunciation. These are the six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation.

…

7. “There is, bhikkhus, equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity; and there is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
18. “And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity? There is equanimity regarding forms, sounds, odors, flavors, and tangibles. This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity.
19. “And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity? There is equanimity regarding the base of infinite space, the base of infinite consciousness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
20. “Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on equanimity that is unified, based on unity, abandon and surmount equanimity that is diversified, based on diversity. It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.
“Bhikkhus, by depending and relying on non-identification, abandon and surmount equanimity that is unified, based on unity. It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted.



-----------------

SN:55:62-74 // Greatness of Wisdom

There are these four things, when developed and cultivated, lead to greatness of wisdom… to extensiveness of wisdom… to vastness of wisdom… to depth of wisdom… to the state of unequalled wisdom… to breadth of wisdom… to abundance of wisdom… to quickness of wisdom… to bouncy of wisdom… to joyousness of wisdom… to swiftness of wisdom… to sharpness of wisdom… to penetrativeness of wisdom.

What four? Association with superior people, hearing the true Dharma, careful attention and practice in accordance to the Dharma. These four things, when developed and cultivated, lead to greatness of wisdom.

-----------------

SN:55:32 // Streams of Merit

Wise ones, there are these four streams of merit, streams of the wholesome, nutriments for happiness. What four?A noble seer possesses:1. Confirmed confidence in the Buddha, the one who has liberated oneself, beyond attachment to this world, and perfected the qualities of the enlightened mind.2. Confirmed confidence in the Dharma, the profound teachings of the enlightened ones which leads to the total liberation from suffering which has been personally experienced by the wise.3. Confirmed confidence in the Sangha, the wise ones practicing Dharma in a good way, noble guides, generating a field of unsurpassed merit for the world.4. Wisdom directed at impermanence, the arising and passing away of all phenomenon, insight which is noble and penetrative, leading to the complete destruction of suffering.A noble seer dwells at home with a mind devoid of the stain of stinginess, freely generous, open-handed, delighting in relinquishment, one devoted to charity, delighted in giving and sharing.

-----------------

SN:48:10 // Faculty of Wisdom

And what, wise ones, is the faculty of wisdom?

Here the noble seer is wise; one possesses wisdom directed to impermanence, the arising and passing away of all phenomenon, with insight which is noble and penetrative, leading to the complete destruction of suffering.

One understands as it actually is: (The Four Noble Truths)
1. 'This is suffering.'
2. 'This is the origin of suffering.'
3. 'This is the cessation of suffering.'
4. 'This is the Way leading to the cessation of suffering.'

This is called the faculty of wisdom.


-------------------

SN:22:95 // Magical Illusion

Suppose that in the last month of the hot season, at high noon, a shimmering mirage appears. One with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to one to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a mirage? So too, wise ones, whatever kind of perception there is, whether past, present or future, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a wise one inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to one to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in perception?

Suppose that a magician or a magician's apprentice would display a magical illusion at a crossroads. One with good sight would inspect it, ponder it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to one to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in a magical illusion? So too, wise ones, whatever kind of consciousness there is, whether past, present or future, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near: a wise one inspects it, ponders it, and carefully investigates it, and it would appear to one to be void, hollow, insubstantial. For what substance could there be in consciousness?

Seeing thus, the instructed noble seer experiences detachment towards consciousness. Experiencing detachment, one becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion, one's mind is liberated.

Form is like a lump of foam,
Feeling like a water bubble;
Perception is like a mirage,
Volitions like a plantain trunk,
and consciousness like an illusion.

However one may ponder it
And carefully investigate it, 
It appears but hollow and voice
When one views it carefully.

With reference to they body
The One of Broad Wisdom has taught
That with the abandoning of three things
One sees this form discarded

When vitality, heat and consciousness
Depart from this physical body,
Then it lies there cast away:
Food for others, without volition.

Such is this continuum,
this illusion, beguiler of fools.
Here no substance can be found.

A wise one with energy aroused
Should look upon the aggregates thus,
Whether by day or at night,
Comprehending, ever mindful.

One should discard all the fetters
And make a refuge for oneself;
Let one fare as with head ablaze,
Yearning for the imperishable state.


----------------------

SN:56:46 // Darkness

Wise ones, there are world crevasses,  vacant and abysmal regions of blinding darkness and gloom, where the light of the sun and moon, so powerful and mighty, does not reach. But, there is a darkness greater and more frightful then even that.

Those who do not understand as it is (The Four Noble Truths) 1. suffering, 2. the origin of suffering, 3. the cessation of suffering and 4. the way leading to he cessation of suffering, they delight in and generate volitional formations (sankhāra) that lead to birth, aging, illness, and death. Doing so, they delight in the path leading to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair. 

Therefore, an exertion should be made to understand: (The Four Noble Truths)
1. 'this is suffering,' 2. 'this is the origin of suffering,' 3. 'this is the cessation of suffering,' 4. 'this is the Way leading to the cessation of suffering.'


----------------------


8 Worldly Conditions // AN:8:6
These eight worldly conditions revolve around the world, and the world revolves around these eight worldly conditions. What eight?

Gain and loss, fame and dishonour, praise and blame, pleasure and pain.

An uninstructed world lying meets with these conditions. So too, an instructed noble seer meets with these conditions. What is the distinction between the noble seer and the uninstructed worldling?

When an uninstructed worldling meets with these worldly conditions, one does not reflect thus: 'This [gain/loss, fame/dishonour, praise/blame, pleasure/pain] that I have met is impermanent, suffering and subject to change.' Thus, these worldly conditions obsess one's mind. One is attracted to gain and repelled by loss…

When an instructed noble seer meets with these worldly conditions, one reflects thus: 'This [gain/loss, fame/dishonour, praise/blame, pleasure/pain] that I have met is impermanent, suffering and subject to change.' Thus one understands it as it really is.

The worldly conditions do not obsess one's mind. One is not attracted to gain or repelled by loss… One is not attracted to fame or repelled by dishonour… One is not attracted to praise or repelled by blame… One is not attracted to pleasure or repelled by pain.

Having thus discarded attractions and repulsion, one is freed from birth, from old age, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain, dejections, and anguish; one is freed from suffering.

----------------------

MN:74:9

This body made of material form, consisting of four great elements, procreated by a mother and father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge, is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration. It should be regarded as impermanent, as suffering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a dart, as a calamity, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as not self. When one regards this body thus, one abandons desire and subservience to the body.



